August 17 is a bad day for Shi Yuqi.” Coach Vimal Kumar had asked Ayush Shetty to write down when he was preparing for his BWF World Championships debut in Bengaluru. It was a message that coach Vimal wanted Ayush to look at every day, as often as he would look into a mirror.

And that's exactly what Ayush Shetty delivered to Shi Yuqi on Monday: a bad day.

The 21-year-old from Karkala in Karnataka announced his arrival at his maiden World Championships, dumping out the defending champion and World No. 1 Shi Yuqi 21-14, 13-21, 21-19. In a show of blistering big smashes and terrific defence, Ayush, buoyed by a vocal home crowd, pulled off the biggest win of his career.

Yet, when the biggest win of his career finally arrived, there was no roar. No wild celebration. Just Ayush Shetty, taking it all in.
There was more relief than joy. The kind of relief that comes after a match that had threatened to slip away when victory was so close.

“I think I'm feeling great. I think it's a really special win and, yeah, we're happy with the way I played today,” Ayush said.

He had every reason to feel relieved.

The 21-year-old had carried a 0-3 record against Shi into his World Championships debut, including a crushing straight-game defeat in the final of the Asia Badminton Championships earlier this year. On Monday, on the biggest stage of his young career and in front of a partisan home crowd, he finally found the answer.

A PLAN COMES ALIVE
Ayush, who idolises Viktor Axelsen, came up with a complete game, timing his big smashes to perfection. Confident when playing against the drift, his straight blocks to Shi's cross-court smashes, followed by the big smashes, became a pattern.
Ayush has often spoken about learning composure from his idol. On Monday, he had to call upon it himself.

“I knew it would be a really tough match and I really had to work very hard. I think I was mentally prepared, physically as well,” he said.

The preparation showed from the beginning.

Playing from the end that allowed him to hit against the drift, Ayush was switched on from the word go. He seized the momentum by winning a 45-shot rally early in the opening game, before those booming smashes began to rain down.

Standing at 6-foot-4, Ayush has one of the most imposing attacking weapons on the circuit. But it was not simply the power that hurt Shi. Ayush was patient about when to use it.

When he was caught out, he lifted high and prepared for the defence. When Shi tried to open up the court, Ayush used straight blocks to close the space before coming back with another attack.

“Yeah, I think when I was getting caught, I was doing the high return, ready for the defence. I think that managed to work really well and, yeah, I think I was defending quite well as well,” Ayush explained.

